I'm excited, today is gonna be a good day.
We are talking about
an introduction to Gatsby.
Gatsby is a cool framework.
We're gonna talk more about what that is,
but before we do that,
let's dive right in with a little
bit of an intro about who I am.
My name is Jason Lengstorf, I am the VP
of Developer Experience at Netlify,
I'm also the host of Learn With Jason.
Once upon a time, I was a Gatsby team
member, I used to work at Gatsby.
I'm also a boop enthusiast,
if you've ever seen my show,
you've seen any of the silly projects
that I make, you'll know that corgis and
boops factor in pretty heavily to my work.
So, before we get started,
let's do a little bit of
disambiguation of what Gatsby isn't.
So there are two Gatsby's.
If you start googling around you're
gonna see references to Gatsby,
the framework and you're also going
to see references to Gatsby Cloud.
These are two sides of the same company,
one is an open source project,
one is a business.
But this can get a little bit confusing,
so
for the purposes of this workshop, let's
be clear that what we are going to be
talking about is only Gatsby
the open source framework.
We're not going to talk
about Gatsby Cloud today.
So, if you're interested in Gatsby Cloud,
you can check out Gatsbjs.com, but
we're not gonna cover that.
So at its core,
Gatsby is a site generator.
Gatsby is a way for
people to build sites from code.
It's very powerful for that.
It rose to popularity as
a way to manage your blog.
You could have markdown files and
turn those into a working
blog site using React,
which is a great way if you're a developer
to get your portfolio out into the world.
Or start writing a blog about
what you're learning or
otherwise collect your thoughts and
get those shared with the world.
Gatsby is also built on React.
So React is a JavaScript framework.
It's made popular by Facebook.
It's what powers their UI.
And the main offering of React
is components and reactivity.
So what you see with React is that you get
your UI breaks down into component files.
Those component files can be mixed,
matched,
shared, remixed, and
it's a little more containable.
It's a little easier to think about and
reason about what's happening in your
code which is why React is powerful.
And then the ability to add in that
reactivity layer, that ability to quickly
pull in React to changes, update the state
based on what's going on, keep track of
some data and update a different
part of your UI based on that data.
Those are all things that
make React really appealing.
It's one of the reasons it's
the leading framework out there today.
Gatsby decided to bet on react as
the right way to build for the web, and
it did this in a way that
involves server side rendering.
So server side rendering is when you take
React code, which typically would run on
a client, and you use a server
to generate the resulting HTML.
So what would happen
after the React code ran,
gives you some markup that
would show in the browser.
That's how you can see the output
of a React app in the browser.
When you server side render React,
you're actually able to eliminate
JavaScript altogether and you just get
some HTML, so Gatsby will take your React,
code server side rendering,
put some HTML in.
And then when it hits the browser,
it'll rehydrate and
put that JavaScript back on top.
So you start where if somebody disables
JavaScript with a Gatsby site,
they'll still be able to load it.
It still works.
You can see the pages,
you can browse the site,
everything works the way you would expect.
And then if you enable JavaScript, you
get more interactivity and more features.
The site will load and then become
app like instead of having to do
a full page refresh, you'll get
JavaScript redirects between pages and
there's a lot of extra bonuses that
happen when you add JavaScript.
But, it's not required, it's an optional
enhancement which I think is a really
powerful model when you start thinking
about building with JavaScript in general.
Gatsby is also all in on GraphQL.
If you're familiar with GraphQL,
it is another Facebook invention.
It is a query language for data.
And if you've worked with API's before,
one of the most common ways that you'll
see that done is through REST endpoints.
That's when you go to a website and
it goes slash API slash posts.
And then when you hit that, you end up
getting back a JSON object that's an array
of the posts and
all the data that you would need.
This is a really powerful model
when you're looking at REST API's.
They are great for
small subsets of data or linear data.
But as data grows in complexity,
you start to see this network effect
where well, you don't just need posts.
I need posts and the comments for
that post and the author of the post and
the authors of the comments and
comments written by those comment author.
And it just starts to get into this messy
thing where I'm not just looking at data
in one way, I'm starting to think
about the the graph of data,
the connections between all the data.
That's what GraphQL is designed to solve.
GraphQL is a way to combine data in
a graph like way which means that we can
say I want my posts and
now right in the query for
my posts, I would like to get the author,
and the comments.
And then inside those queries, I would
also like to get additional comments,
additional posts by that author,
maybe categories, and related posts.
All those things can
happen in the same query.
Whereas in REST, I would have to
make an individual rest call for
each of those things and
then combine that data myself.
So, GraphQL is, it treats data as
more of a free form flexible thing,
whereas REST t is a little more rigid
about the way that it approaches data.
And that's why Gatsby went all in on.
Gatsby has made this bet on, you're going
to build sites using content from a lot of
different places, your file system,
you'll have images,
you'll maybe pull in
some third party data.
You're gonna have additional
things coming in.
And all of those need to connect,
I have a blog post, but
I need to pull some images for it.
I also wanna pull in some comments
from a third party system.
And there are a lot of things that lead to
me needing data from a lot of sources and
I don't wanna have to do that
data reconciliation myself.
GraphQL allows me to pull all those
together in a single query and
then use them and
that's why Gatsby is bet on that.
Gatsby is also opinionated, Gatsby is
gonna tell you where to put your files.
It's gonna tell you how to query for data.
It's gonna give you components that you
should use to get all the benefits, right?
It's very much a framework that says,
we're going to give you a set of
guardrails within which you can succeed,
it's designed for that.
And this is a really good thing when you
are trying to get something done quickly,
when you're trying to get a whole
team to follow the same set of rules.
One of the biggest challenges you'll
run into with any software at scale,
is documentation.
So when you write bespoke software,
you're not just writing code,
you also have to write and
maintain the documentation for that code.
Or else anybody who's
never worked on it before,
is having to learn the entire system from
scratch through reverse engineering.
When you use an opinionated framework,
when you opt into something like reactor
to Gatsby, what you're getting is
a lot of community documentation and
a lot of community best practices
that lighten your documentation back.
So instead of having to document the whole
system, here's every bit of code we wrote,
why it does, what it does and
how you can use it.
We can now say, most of this is React,
most of this is Gatsby.
You are also able though,
to do these things,
so we only have to document our custom
stuff instead of the whole thing.
And that can be a strength,
it can also be a hindrance, and
there are reasons why you wouldn't
want a super opinionated framework.
I find that for myself,
whenever I'm working on code,
if I find that the majority of the code
I'm writing is to back out of decisions
made by the framework I've chosen,
I've probably chosen the wrong framework.
So when you're planning your project, when
you're thinking through how you're gonna
build this thing,
start considering the trade offs.
Is this something that will benefit
from that consistency, those guardrails,
that high predictability of how
things will be created on the site or
is this something where what
I'm trying to do is weird?
I'm trying to do something
that I've never seen before.
And for me to do this using a framework,
we'll require me to back out a bunch of
decisions or use the escape hatches to
get away from the opinions that
are held by this framework.
Gatsby is built around performance,
it's one of their core value propositions.
They are very conscious of how to
make websites load and feel faster.
One of the big promises of the web
has always been that we can make
our own app store.
We've seen this in progressive web apps.
We've seen this in the ability
to have a website be offline and
installable on your desktop,
on mobile phones.
But there's always been this issue
where apps generally just feel better,
they feel snappy.
They feel like things just happen,
right and
Gatsby is trying to address that problem.
Gatsby is doing a lot of things behind
the scenes that make pages feel
like they load instantly, that make
your initial page loads really fast.
And all of that, we'll get into the
specifics of how they do that as we start
actually building a site.
But at its core, Gatsby is always trying
to think about the way that it will
impact its users on the performance side.
And probably the biggest reason to
use Gatsby is that Gatsby is wildly
convinient.
It has a bunch of starters that do
most of the things you would need.
You wanna build a blog, great,
there's a bunch of different templates
that you can install right now,
that will give you a blog and
all you have to do is start writing.
It also has a huge number of plugins and
whether those are for
pulling in data from somewhere else,
hooking into third party services.
Doing transformations of
data into different formats,
all of those things are not only possible,
but really straightforward with Gatsby.
So if you're trying to get something up
in a hurry, Gatsby is worth considering
because it's so fast and so convenient
versus rolling something on your own.